So we just talked about sub queries.
We are gonna talk about transactions.
So we're gonna pop back over to the recipe
database just for just a hot moment.
If you hit \L, you should see,
recipeguru here like I do.
If you don't, let me just show
you how to recreate it just
say CREATE DATABASE recipeguru: like that,
right?
You'll hit Enter, I think mine is
gonna say, I already have one, so
I'm not going to, but
yours was should would say, okay?
You would hit \c recipeguru, okay?
If you hit \d, you would see nothing.
If you do see something then you're fine,
don't do anything.
If you see nothing there,
then come back over here.
If you remember what
section was it in JSONB,
maybe know the project.
So under joins and constraints project
there's two projects the second one.
There this link to this big SQL file,
if you click on that, that will download,
that's my fourth copy of it.
Just copy and paste that and
you can past at here, I'll do it,
because it just recreate everything
from scratch and there you go.
Now you should see this.
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM recipes:,
you should see I have 56 something
around there, good enough.
Okay, now that we're that you should see
recipeguru here, we should be good to go.
If you see OMDB there, you're still came
to the wrong database \c recipeguru.
Let's talk about transactions
cuz these are actually really
important particularly for
certain classes of database activity.
Particularly if you're in
financial tech like me.
So imagine you are writing
banking software.
You have Bob,
who was trying to give $10,000 to Alice.
You have two queries there, right?
You're gonna have to subtract
$10,000 from Bob's account and
you're going to have to add
$10,000 to Alice's account.
Those are two separate queries,
you're not gonna do them in one query.
What happens if you subtract $10,000
from Bob's account and then in
the middle of that before you can run
the second query, your database crashes?
Well, you have a massive problem.
Bob has lost $10,000,
Alice has not gained $10,000.
The bank has robbed Bob,
I'm sure Bob is not happy about that.
Furthermore, Alice doesn't have her
$10,000 and if you did it in the opposite
order, where you gave Alice the $10,000
first in your database crashed.
No, the bankers giving away money, right?
Both of those are wholly
unacceptable outcomes.
So we live in this situation now where
both of those have to succeed or
both of them have to fail.
If both of them fail, they might be
annoyed that the money didn't get moved to
the way that they wanted it to.
But no one's gonna call a lawyer just yet,
right?
So we need what's called
an atomic transaction.
Atomic means the Greek word,
indivisible, right?
You cannot divide this either all works or
none of it works, nothing in the middle.
This is something that SQL provides for
lots of banks use SQL and
all sorts of flavors and varieties.
And so
transactions are absolutely essential.
So you need to think about transactions
when you have something where multiple
things need to happen in succession and
they cannot afford to fail, right?
Or like you cannot have partial failure,
right?
Partial failure is unacceptable,
this is where transactions are useful.
So what will happen with
a transaction is you'll say begin.
You'll do a couple of things and
then you'll say end and
then it'll execute all of them.
So let's say we're making a new recipe,
and we wanna add things into ingredient.
And for whatever reason,
we cannot afford or
tolerate ingredients without recipes,
just like fattening that
other situation there.
So what you need to
insert into ingredients?
We will need to insert into recipes.
And then we will need to
insert into recipe ingredients
all of the correct IDs, right?
All of the correct connections.
So it's a bit of a long query.
So we're just gonna copy and
paste it from the site, but
we'll go through it together.
Essential, we're gonna say begin.
Begin basically means we're
about to start a transaction.
You can also say, begin transaction or
you can say begin work,
they all mean the same thing.
You can also just say,
begin because we're lazy,
we'll do it that way.
Insert into ingredients, right?
So we got whiskey and simple syrup, you
can replace this with like I don't know
soda if you don't wanna talk about
alcohol, that's fine with me too.
We're gonna insert into
recipes old fashioned, right?
And I have the very descriptive
molded fashion cuz again I should
not be writing courses about food.
And then we're going to
INSERT INTO recipe_ingredients.
And we have to use subqueries because
we have to go get those ids, right?
So the first value is going to be the id,
the recipe_id from 'old fashioned' and
the id from 'whiskey'.
The second one that we're going to
add in here is the id FROM recipes
old fashion again and
the id FROM simple syrup.
Then once we have finished all of that,
once we're happy with
the state of our transaction.
We can say COMMIT,
commit transaction, commit work,
those are all the same thing and then
it'll actually go and do all of those.
If any part of these fails,
if this part fails everything is canceled,
this is canceled, this is canceled,
all of its canceled.
But if everything succeeds,
then the entire thing is committed
in one atomic transaction.
So you now avoid the problem of what
happens if my database fails in
the middle of this, or
what second queries doesn't work, right?
That's what all of this does.
So we're gonna do this, I'm gonna do
BEGIN I am not going to do COMMIT.
So I'm going to do this, all of that.
I have not typed COMMIT yet,
even though I see all these
basically means that it's inserted.
I'm still in the middle of a transaction.
If I say SELECT * FROM
ingredients WHERE name,
is it name, it's title, right, title.
title = simple syrup it will come back,
right?
The reason why it comes
back is that according
to this session of this
person like this one
P SQL session that has happened, right?
However, if I open a brand new tab and
I do docker exec and
I connect to it again and
I'm connecting to recipeguru.
And I say SELECT,
I'm gonna run the exact same
* FROM ingredients WHERE
title = simple syrup.
Nothing's shows up because that
transaction hasn't happened yet.
So I'm gonna go back here,
if I wanted to just blow it up and
not have anything happen,
what I would do is I'd say, ROLLBACK and
now we'll just cancel my transaction
immediately, I don't want to.
So I'm gonna say COMMIT.
If I do it again, from here again,
it's still there.
But now if I go back to
this other new session and
say SELECT * FROM
ingredients simple syrup.
Now this shows up, because that
transaction has been committed.
Again, there's not really a big
performance consideration here.
I wouldn't worry so much that.
The consideration here is, your tolerance
for failure and partial failures,
that's where transactions are essential.
So I'm trying to think if there's anything
outside I wanted to tell you about there.
Yeah, I mean, I wanna copy this,
I just wanna show you what
ROLLBACK back looks like
We can even just do this
And don't need that,
will say this is like I don't know.
Something else it doesn't matter.
Okay, so we'll do this again.
I've done two inserts here,
and if I'm unsatisfied
with how this is going,
you can just say ROLLBACK.
And all of a sudden everything is back to
where it was that these two things are not
in the database because I
rolled them back Make sense?
And again you can say begin work, you
can also say begin transaction if those
makes more sense to you,
beginners just short for that.
Sometimes it's helpful for
BEGIN because BEGIN means several
things in SQL contextually.
Whereas BEGIN transaction is obviously
very specific to beginning a transaction
that can be useful sometimes.
The question I ask myself is like this
is really kind of burdensome doing
these subqueries here.
You actually can do this with
the variables, so that I can get the ID
back when I do this insert, and
the ID back when I do this insert.
And then instead of doing the subqueries,
we can actually put the IDs from its
stored in variables rather
than doing subqueries.
You have to do it in PL PG SQL,
there it is sorry,
it takes a second for
me to remember how to say that always.
So I wanted to just show
you how to do that,
you can't do a transaction inside of a
function, but you can do it outside of it.
So let's say I wanted to add mimosas,
the way that you would do that
is you would begin work here.
Again, you could just say
BEGIN here I just did work.
So you could say that this BEGIN
is different than this BEGIN,
this is the beginning of a function,
this is the beginning of a transaction.
I declare variables, champagne,
orange juice and mimosa.
I insert into this and
then I return ID into champagne.
So that's how you store
this into a variable.
Return ID into orange juice,
ID into mimosa.
And I do those for all of my inserts here.
And then here into recipe ingredients,
I can refer to recipe ID ingredient ID,
mimosa, champagne mimosa, orange juice,
and then at the end here I can COMMIT.
Just to show you that all worked.
Here the do that this is probably the
operative thing that you're looking for.
You're telling Postgres,
I'm about to run a function.
So you give it this body, it immediately
executes as opposed to like creating
a function and storing that like we did.
Where we are actually just creating
a function and invoking it immediately.
Because we wanna do something
like run JavaScript or
run the Postgres programming
language directly.
So ask yourself which one of
these do you like better?
I'm gonna say I probably
like this one better,
even though the sub queries
are a little annoying.
I'm getting fooled into a turing complete
programming language in mySQL not my
favorite thing to do personally.
That's really it for transactions,
it's just BEGIN and COMMIT or BEGIN and
ROLLBACK, everything else here I'm
kinda showing you just for fun.
And again, you cannot have
a function do a transaction.
However, you can use functions
inside of transactions.